For each sample, water was collected from several Niskin bottles fired at the same depth mounted on a CTD-rosette system (Seabird SBE32 Carousel Water Sampler). A silicone tube fitted with 200 µm mesh was used to remove larger zooplankton and gently transfer water from the Niskin into a 10 L carboy. A subsample was collected from this carboy after thorough and gentle mixing. Approximately 300 mL of seawater were gently transferred into an amber glass jar, fixed using 2% Lugol’s acid (Menden-Deuer et al. 2001), and stored in the dark until analysis in the lab. While preservation in Lugol’s can introduce some species-specific changes in cell size, it has been shown that it does not introduce significant bias when assessing mixed communities (Menden-Deuer et al. 2001). 

In the lab, between 10 and 50 mL, depending on cell density, of each Lugol’s-fixed sample were settled into a 1 mL sedimentation slide with an Utermöhl chamber (HYDRO-BIOS, Utermöhl 1958) for 24 hours before being analyzed using a Nikon E800 inverted microscope with a magnification of 4x, 10x, 20x, or 40x, and an additional 10x magnification on the eyepiece. Images were taken using a mounted Stingray (model F-146) or OMAX (model A35180U3) camera. Both cameras were calibrated with a micro ruler at each magnification level to convert pixels to micrometers.

A semi-automated image analysis process was used to convert raw microscope images to estimates of carbon biomass. The contrast of the images was adjusted to distinguish regions of interest (ROI, e.g. particles), and the ROIs were automatically cropped into a single image file. All cropped pictures were then checked manually to determine which ROIs represented microzooplankton, and to categorize microzooplankton into dinoflagellates and ciliates. Dinoflagellates of the genus *Tripos* (formerly *Ceratium*) were further categorized into three morphotypes: *Ceratium furcoides*-like, *Ceratium fusus*-like, and *Ceratium tripos*-like. The regionprops MATLAB function was used to automatically measure the major and minor axes lengths of each cell. Dinoflagellates in the genus *Tripos* were measured manually using the software ImageJ. Carbon biomass is overestimated when using the automated regionprops-generated measurements of cell size for ciliates, since the automated measurements include the cilia which do not contribute substantially to carbon biomass. Therefore, a subset of 215 ciliates was manually measured in ImageJ excluding the cilia. The regression between manually and automatically measured lengths revealed that cilia contributed on average 12% to the overall length of ciliates, which would lead to an overestimation using the automated measurements. This relationship was used to determine a correction factor that was applied to all ciliates in the dataset, and therefore this overestimation is corrected for in the data reported here. 

Biovolume was calculated from size measurements of 2D images, assuming all cells are prolate spheroids (Hillebrand et al. 1999), except for *Tripos* whose biovolume was calculated based on morphotype-specific equations (Napiórkowska-Krzebietke & Kobos 2016). Estimates of biomass calculated from 2D measurements of cell images do not differ significantly from 3D estimates of volume (McNair et al. 2021). Carbon biomass was calculated from biovolume using established carbon to volume relationships from Menden-Deuer & Lessard (2000). Biomass is expressed in μg C per L by considering the volume of sample analyzed. Here we report total biomass estimates of dinoflagellates and ciliates for each sample. The use of an inverted microscope to image Lugol’s- preserved samples precludes the distinction of dinoflagellates containing plastids or chlorophyll, and therefore, some autotrophic dinoflagellates were included in these estimates. However, the trophic status of many dinoflagellates previously believed to be strictly autotrophic has been revised in recent years as it becomes more apparent that mixotrophy is prevalent amongst marine dinoflagellates (Flynn et al. 2013; Jeong et al. 2010, Jones et al. 2025). Many plastid- and chlorophyll-containing dinoflagellates are still capable of heterotrophy and should therefore be considered as potential grazers (Stoecker et al. 2017). The presence of *Tripos* was sporadic and highly influential on biomass, so they are excluded from estimates of overall dinoflagellate biomass reported, but individual cell sizes in pixels are provided in the cell properties table. Dinoflagellates and ciliates were manually identified. Biomass values reported here are for two size categories, a major axis length of greater and less than 20 μm, respectively.

Data package assembly details are available at https://github.com/WHOIGit/nes-lter-microzooplankton-biomass-transect

References:

Flynn, K. J., Stoecker, D. K., Mitra, A., Raven, J. A., Glibert, P. M., Hansen, P. J., Granéli, E., & 
Hillebrand, H., Dürselen, C.-D., Kirschtel, D., Pollingher, U., & Zohary, T. (1999). Biovolume Calculation for Pelagic and Benthic Microalgae. Journal of Phycology, 35(2), 403–424. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1529-8817.1999.3520403.x

Jeong, H. J., Yoo, Y. D., Kim, J. S., Seong, K. A., Kang, N. S., & Kim, T. H. (2010). Growth, feeding and ecological roles of the mixotrophic and heterotrophic dinoflagellates in marine planktonic food webs. Ocean Science Journal, 45(2), 65–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12601-010-0007-2

Jones, E. L., Menden-Deuer, S., & Rynearson, T. (2025). Trophic Mode Database (TMD) for Dinoflagellate and Ciliate Species. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14866528
Mcnair, H., Hammond, C. N., & Menden-Deuer, S. (2021). Phytoplankton carbon and nitrogen biomass estimates are robust to volume measurement method and growth environment. Journal of Plankton Research, 43(2), 103–112. https://doi.org/10.1093/plankt/fbab014

Menden-Deuer, S., & Lessard, E. J. (2000). Carbon to volume relationships for dinoflagellates, diatoms, and other protist plankton. Limnology and Oceanography, 45(3), 569–579. https://doi.org/10.4319/lo.2000.45.3.0569

Menden-Deuer, S., Lessard, E. J., & Satterberg, J. (2001). Effect of preservation on dinoflagellate and diatom cell volume and consequences for carbon biomass predictions. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 222, 41–50. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps222041

Napiórkowska-Krzebietke, A., & Kobos, J. (2016). Assessment of the cell biovolume of phytoplankton widespread in coastal and inland water bodies. Water Research, 104, 532–546. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.08.016

Stoecker, D. K., Hansen, P. J., Caron, D. A., & Mitra, A. (2017). Mixotrophy in the Marine Plankton. Annual Review of Marine Science, 9(Volume 9, 2017), 311–335. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-marine-010816-060617

Utermöhl, H. (1958). Zur Vervollkommnung der quantitativen Phytoplankton-Methodik: Mit 1 Tabelle und 15 abbildungen im Text und auf 1 Tafel. Internationale Vereinigung Für Theoretische Und Angewandte Limnologie: Mitteilungen, 9(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1080/05384680.1958.11904091


